Palestinian police escorting Aid trucks
in Gaza are being regularly attacked by
Israel's military and that's as tens of
thousands of people are starving in the
strip and civil order is breaking down
so is Benjamin netanyahu's government
creating a security vacuum in Gaza and
if so
why
hello and welcome to the program I'm D
abuga the Biden Administration says
Palestinian police trying to help
deliver Aid to Gaza are being targeted
by Israel's military and they're among
others in positions of authority like
journalists doctors and ambulance
workers who've all been repeatedly
attacked along with civilians and this
comes on top top of the destruction of
infrastructure from the north to the
South including hospitals schools roads
communication networks and the water
system it's part of a deepening
humanitarian catastrophe as tens of
thousands of people are starving and
heavy fighting is continuing to take
lives so why is Israel systematically
targeting all arms of Palestinian
Authority in Gaza and what does this
mean for the future governance of the
strip we have plenty to to discuss with
our guests but first this
report US officials are urging Israel to
stop attacking Palestinian police trying
to ensure the safety of Aid trucks
Israeli air strikes on officers have
hindered the delivery of essential
supplies and the US says that's allowing
armed groups to seize control in the
strip especially in the north this has
caused the number of a trucks entering
Gaza to reduce significantly and has led
to more Palestinians being forced from
their homes or shelters and widespread
starvation the situation is tough rough
and difficult anywhere in Gaza Strip the
whole Palestinian people suffer too much
we all suffer the world mocks us and
gives us a can of beans the Palestinian
people can't afford to buy anything one
onion costs three
shekels we have never seen that before
some families have been all killed in
one go
and their names will never be there in
the records this is not
fair I am 73 years old and I have never
been in such a miserable situation I've
seen so many wars but this is the worst
I've never witnessed anything like this
starvation we used to suffer a lot but
not like this on Thursday Israeli
aircraft bombed buildings belonging to
Palestinian police in the middle of a
crowded Market in the ja refugee camp in
the
North US officials say at least 11
police officers in Rafa have been killed
in Israeli air strikes in recent weeks
vital infrastructure including hospitals
schools roads and the water system have
also been hit worsening the humanitarian
crisis Israeli officials say they have
drafted plans to enable Aid to get into
Gaza such as by cooperating with local
groups that oppose Hamas but it's
unclear whether these proposals that
include the opening of a new Crossing in
Northern Gaza will be implemented in the
near future and any role for the
International Community in the future
governance of the territory is also
uncertain Felix Nara Inside
[Music]
Story okay let's bring in our panel of
guests to unpack the situation which has
Cru crucial consequences for the people
of Gaza as well as global politics
joining us from London is Chris gannis
who is a spokesman for unwa during
previous Israeli attacks on the strip
and he's now the director of the Myanmar
accountability project in ramala and the
occupied West Bank W habas is a
researcher at the Palestinian forum for
Israeli studies his work focuses on
Colonial structures placed by Israel on
the occupied territories and joining us
from the he is Sultan Barakat who's a
professor of public policy at hammed bin
Khalifa University here in Qatar
gentlemen welcome to the program thanks
so much for your
time if I may start with you is Israel
Israel deliberately
targeting um the aidid workers the the
police in the Gaza Strip as well as um
other POS people in positions of
authority yes for sure uh intentionally
Israel is targeting everything I want
wanted to say that the the day after
plan which netan introduced days before
includes what Israel doesn't want from
Gaza and does not include what it wants
exactly and therefore if I may analyze
the situation isra I do let me just stop
you right there for just a moment well
because we're going to talk about the
plan that Netanyahu has submitted to
security cabinet when it comes to the
day after but first let's just look at
these attacks why do you say that Israel
is deliberately targeting uh these
people what do you base that
on because Israel wants to deive Hamas
from three things three important things
for first the administration of the
civilian Affairs including of course
later on the education and the healthare
but currently the any type of
administration inside Gaza Strip the
second thing is the Reconstruction
process and the third thing is the
humanitarian AIDS and money and by the
way this is why also owna is targeting
in a way or another so showing like
having Israel
civilian police by
Hamas controlling the AIDS that coming
inside Gaza is one of the targets that
Israel have been like in the last two
weeks Israel have reduced decreased the
number of trucks entering Gaza very
sharply and the one of the reasons is
that that there is no h a official party
inside Gaza to receive these AIDS and to
distribute them if we want to connect
this uh to the current negotiations in
Paris Israel uses this as a strategic
tool ER to impose pressure on on Hamas
of course because in this way Israel
aims at making a Chasm if I may say so
between the isra the the gazan
population and the government of Hamas
or the Hamas in general this Chasm will
create like a humanitarian crisis
because nobody's governing
administrating the population in Gaza
and this is exactly what Israel wants to
do to to to to to increase its pressure
on Hamas okay God thank you so much W
for that analysis from rala Chris gunnis
um in London look you were the spokes
spokesman for unoa during previous
Israeli attack so you've seen what
happens during Israel's Wars on Gaza
have you you seen this before and do you
share W's assessment that these are in
fact deliberate attacks by
Israel yes and yes I have seen these
before and I absolutely do agree with
W's analysis isn't it interesting though
that Joe Biden who gave a green light to
Mr Netanyahu for his War aim to
completely destroy Hamas is now
realizing what we all knew in the first
place which is that ultimately Hamas
will be necessary Hamas will be
necessary in the short term for the
delivery of humanitarian Aid Hamas is
more than just a vicious organization
that kills Israelis which is how it's
portrayed in the west Hamas is a
political movement and it's very clear
that in order to deliver Aid in the
short term the structures the social
structures the the medical structures
the other structures the education
structures are going to be necessary in
the shortterm in the medium term and in
the long term when it comes to
discussing the reconstruction
of Gaza the idea that Hamas should be
completely destroyed is absolutely
self-defeating if ultimately what you're
interested in is rebuilding Gaza and
preparing the people there for
participation in a two-state solution or
whatever kind of state solution and
isn't it also interesting that as well
as Biden giving a green light for
destroying Hamas the Americans are also
giving a green light to destroying anra
now if you destroy the Hamas political
structures as well as unr's humanitarian
Aid structures you are left with pretty
much nothing so I think we all need to
wake up and I think the American
Administration is waking up to the fact
that this policy of underwriting
netanyahu's erroneous war war aims are
entirely self-defeating the world should
go back and remember what it was doing
in 2005 2006 at that time the moderates
the technocrats the businessmen within
Hamas were being empowered to stand in
elections and guess what they did stand
in elections the moderates in Hamas did
very well but what did the world do led
by Israel led by the Americans in the
quartet who took of course unr's sorry
the un's political office and all of the
UN and the Russians and the Europeans as
part of G with them they decided to
isolate and effectively to destroy Hamas
we heard this place before it leads
nowhere we need to sense empowering them
give us a sense Chris gunnis of what
this means for the risk for the civilian
population in Gaza as a result of all of
this it's a very good question you rais
and the risks are immeasurable here we
have 2.3 million people actually
experiencing the beginnings of
starvation starvation is a longterm slow
motion Massacre and it has started so
the UN has already said the senior most
humanitarian the UN has said that
400,000 people are actually starving now
so if this policy is allowed to continue
attacking Hamas destroying the Hamas Aid
workers destroying anra the consequences
will be absolutely apocalyptic and the
his and history will judge these Western
leaders very harshly which is why I say
unra needs to be refunded immediately
destroying Hamas destroying unra will
lead to Absolute catastrophe it will
backfire on the west Gaza is being
radicalized Gaza is being bombed back to
the Stone Age the people there have
suffered enough it's time for a complete
policy rethink and I hope that what
we're seeing from the Biden
Administration in these latest comments
is the beginning of that policy rethink
and certainly the realization that
allowing Netanyahu to press on with this
war aim of defeating Hamas is absolutely
erroneous it's self-defeating it must be
rethought IM immediately because the
people of Gaza have suffered enough okay
let's bring in Sultan Barakat um
speaking of Biden Chris gunnis was just
mentioning President Biden Sultan so his
administration has reportedly asked
Israel to stop targeting members of the
civilian police force who escort a
trucks in Gaza and apparently warning
that a total breakdown of Law and Order
is significantly exacerbating the
humanitarian crisis in The Enclave um it
it what do you make of this this
response by by the American
Administration I mean do they have to
come out and say something at this point
while at the same time continuing to arm
the
Israelis how does this make
sense they've been coming out and saying
all sorts of things over the last few
weeks while continuing to arm the
Israelis and clearly Israel does not
take much of what they say into
consideration uh the idea I think the
Americans are putting forward is Central
around revital revitalized uh
Palestinian Authority and uh they have
now called again for for the two State
as the ultimate solution for the
conflict between Israel and Palestine as
did many nations I think Netanyahu is
mistaken to think that now he can
dictate on the Palestinians and the rest
of the world what the future of Gaza
would look like he has it's a big
miscalculation because of the
mobilization that has happened in
opinions in court courts all over the
world uh people are not I I think will
find it very difficult to accept what
he's putting forward his idea is to
continue occupation but without calling
it occupation without being accountable
for it as an occupation he's calling for
Israel continuing to have full security
control not only in Gaza but also in the
West Bank so he's reversing whatever
small achievements have have been made
with the oso agreement he's talking
about full control from The River To The
Sea and within that he would like the
Palestinians to go back to the tribal
days where he would selectively appoint
uh civil leaders tribal leaders who will
then uh carry the Aid on behalf of the
population manage the their daily
Affairs and so on and that is totally
unrealistic and in fact it could
backfire big way because the absence of
order uh as was explained earlier by
Chris and W is actually actually not a
threat only for the Palestinians but
it's also a threat for the very security
of Israel so the best way I think moving
forward is is we isra Israel has got to
accept that occupation must come to an
end a two-state solution is not is not
something that they can reject
unilaterally uh and they don't have the
right to deprive the Palestinians of
self-determination if they don't want to
occupy according to the international
law then they have to step back a little
bit and allow the International
Community to take on its responsibility
and from that point I think the
International Community has really run
out of options short of international
protection and given the number of
people that have been killed we're now
edging on 30,000 people directly killed
through this war International
protection is the only way forward and
it has to come under chapter 7 where
Palestinians are protected not only in
Gaza but also in the West Bank to allow
them the space to come up with this
revitalized uh government or
state and this will take time it could
be a two or three or fouryear uh break
but it cannot be done under the
administration of the military
administration of the Israelis because
Israel has shown long enough history uh
of very aggressive occupation which many
nations if you were following I'm now
speaking to you from the he have
Illustrated it one after the other over
the last few days in the heg if you
refer to the Qatari statement for
example they've very clearly pointed out
the nature of this occupation it's not
it's not an an ideal form of occupation
that follows the law this occupation is
determined to depopulate the area and
push the Palestinian Palestinians out
and before okay I I hear what you're
saying about about um the occupation
because of course that is the context
for for everything that is happening
here but wed raised a point earlier on
and he said that uh for Israel to
destroy sort of the the Civil Society
and civil Administration in Gaza this is
a strategic tool to pressure Hamas when
it comes to any sorts of negotiations
taking place and we know now uh there
have been negotiations of course in
Paris we wait to hear what comes out of
those um do you think that Israel first
of all do you agree with that statement
and do you think that Israel is
succeeding in pressuring Hamas in that
way I mean what can they do more than
killing 30,000 people destroying the
Hall of Gaza I don't think it's about
just pressuring Hamas although it may
have some impact it's really about
making sure that the whole population is
mobile they want the Palestinians to be
uh in a mobile form where they can be
pushed anywhere at any time they pushed
them from North to the middle of Gaza to
now to the south of Gaza there talks
about Arrangement between them and Egypt
to temporarily push them into SI and
then allow them back after Israel has
secured the area all these scenarios I
think are obviously are illegal and
unrealistic and if anything they're
going to generate a create a generation
that will be full of more hatred to
Israel than the one that has just passed
uh Israel without changing fundamentally
the way they address the Palestinian
question they can never have security
and they must get that into their minds
no way for the 2.5 million people to
love the Israelis and live with them uh
you know as neighbors under the current
circumstances no one will do it and we
have seen much lesser sort of intens
intensity conflicts around the world and
and they were not able to reverse the
level of hatred uh by simply allowing
small amount of Aid here and there okay
W uh we started out the the the show and
you you said that you wanted to address
this uh netanyahu's post-war Gaza plan
now part of the document states that and
I'm quoting here that local elements
with management experience will be
responsible for civilian management and
public order in Gaza right this is what
Netanyahu is saying that he plans to do
and then we see this destruction of the
Civil Society and civil Administration
in Gaza is there a link between the two
and talk to us about uh about
netanyahu's plan and what you make of
it yes of course and if you allow me I
want to summarize a little bit the
history since 1967 and I want to refer
you to Momo Gaz
which he was the second governor of the
colonial Administration in the west back
Gaza Strip he he he put his book titled
the carrot and the stick and he says
that Israel can only prevent the
Palestinians from self-determination
only if
Israel administrates or controls or
manage the Palestinian population it
manages the Palestinian population
through an indirect colonial rule
whether it was like The Villages leagues
the Palestinian Authority through
International agreements or whe whether
with Clans or families inside Gaza this
is the plan n is talking about
regardless it is an indirect colonial
rule in which a colonial bureaucracy
which is the military
Council led by the Israeli occupation
forces H lead the third component is the
carrot and the stick which means that
the parties which Israel wants to
collaborate with are to be
rewarded empowered if they adhire to
Israeli security policy and Israeli
agenda and they are punished uh and
violence could be used against the
population and these uh parties that
controls or manages the Palestinians
Affairs inside Gaza or West Bank
wherever okay this is the carot and the
stick and we never saw like a much more
violent stick than the genocidal war
that we witness today but if we talk
about the day after Gaza Netanyahu
mentioned what he doesn't want in Gaza
but he never said what he really do want
in Gaza and the reason is that he left
this intentionally he wants to make a
vacuum in order to
re-engineer this colonial administration
of the Gaza Strip of course preserve the
split between the Gaza and the West Bank
H this discussion is a little bit
different from discussing the occupation
from the international law perspective
we if we look at the colonial management
of the Palestinian population we see
that netanyahu's day after plan is part
and parcel of a long Doctrine started in
1967 okay let's bring in Chris GIS um
Chris the Israeli military when asked
whether they were targeting uh police uh
who are guard ing Aid convoys had this
response the Israeli forces said uh we
the the IDF is operating to dismantle
Hamas military capabilities elements
involved in military activity may be
targeted what do you make of that
response well I living proof of the
disinformation and frankly the lies
which the IDF have put out I could write
my PhD thesis about this those comments
are simply not to be trusted reality the
number of civilians women and children
who have been killed lie that frankly
insulting statement but can I pick up on
something which Sultan I think was
saying quite rightly earlier and that is
about the right of the occupying power
to have a role and a say in the
political dispensation of what comes
next the so-call day after what we have
right now which Sultan alluded to is
more than a quarter of the UN member
states in the he right now at the icj
asking for an urgent determination that
the occupation is illegal twofold first
of all in the the way it's applied the
apartate system the arrest the torture
of children in the middle of the night
the blockade of Gaza and now this
genocide but also existentially that the
occupation is illegal because it denies
the Palestinians the right which All
Peoples have to
self-determination so the idea that the
occupying power can determine who in
Gaza decides on self-determination is a
clear absurdity and the other I think
very valid point that sulan made it's
about International protection when you
look at Rua when you look at 1.5 and
growing number of people in a place
which was intended to support life for a
quarter of a million people that's six
times more than is there clearly the
protection of those people and the whole
of Gaza needs to be taken out of the
hands of the Israelis and put under
International protection now what does
that mean precisely we need to look back
at what President Obama did after the
Haiti earthquake in 2010 he signed an
executive order and within days 20,000
US service and civilian Personnel were
on the ground there were warships off
the coast of Haiti there were floating
hospitals there were aircraft carriers
with helicopters fing people backwards
and forwards we need to establish 75,000
latrines you know one latrine for 20
people that's what the UN calculates 1.5
million people do the math that's 75,000
thein t for people um you know how many
TS is that we need a huge mobilization
of a global humanitarian effort probably
led by America um but others need to
join in and that needs to be mobilized
immediately such that the plight of 1,5
1.5 million people does not deteriorate
to the point where a catastrophe turns
into an apocalypse okay let's get Sultan
to elaborate on this point of
international protection Sultan how do
you get there and you know Chris gunnis
is saying that you need America to kind
of spearhead this that's one would say
highly unlikely isn't
it well at the moment is probably
difficult given that the United States
is in elections here and that's
something that natano understands very
well but I feel that the issue has now
gone beyond the hands of the United
States and even the permanent five
although there is an attempt by the
United Kingdom and others to circumvent
the discussion in the ha to bring back
the issue of the Palestinian uh the
occupation of Palestine to the security
Council knowing 100% that it's been
there for 75 years and nothing happened
uh the rest of the world is waking up
and I think Gaza coming so close to
Ukraine and the contrast it has uh
developed when you compare the two cases
has given the rest of the world
particularly the global South and an
incredible amount of energy to stand up
to all sort of injustices what we saw
South Africa doing in the heg is is not
uh an it's not an easy task for a
country like South Africa to take Israel
knowing exactly who's behind it uh to
take them to court but it has really
started to worken up the the humanity of
the majority of the population including
large numbers of the populations within
those dominating countries so I would be
uh really uh surprised I don't think we
can really go back to the before seven
of October Arrangement that the Israelis
can simply assume
they will dictate on the rest of the
world what can happen uh and
particularly I mean they need to look at
it from their security perspective not
only the security of Israel but the
security of all of us from a a wave that
we dread to think about in terms of of
terrorism what the Israelis have fed
through the killing the Relentless
killing of the Palestinians they have
fed a huge you know anger around the
world that can easily translate into uh
terrorist movements that will probably
be much much worse than we saw around
the 911 and the years after so it is in
the interest of everyone to start
thinking collectively as to how to
diffuse the situation on humanitarian
basis but also in security basis and
also on developmental basis you know
when we talk about the Reconstruction
jump pardon I do apologize but just for
the sake of time we just have one minute
remaining and I see that wed wants to
jump in there W final thoughts for
you yes I wanted to say that
regardless of our position from
Hamas and I everybody all the
Palestinians think that it is the right
to use revolutionary violence against
the occupation power but regardless of
the position of Hamas it is the
ethically the the the the the the role
of Hamas to govern Gaza Strip in the day
after because he it was the government
responsible of the of 2,00 2.5 million
Palestinians and she holds all the fs
and and she holds all everything in Gaza
so it is part of destroying the the the
the the gazan population if you want to
move this Administration like suddenly
to any other party and it is also the
role of the the the the Arab countries
the Arab regimes that surrounding Gaza
to contribute once and
forever to end this humanitarian er um
well in in in Gaza Strip okay thank you
so much we'll have to leave it there
thank you for joining us thanks to all
my guests Chris gunnis W habas and
Sultan Barakat thanks for watching you
can see the program again anytime by
visiting our website aljazeera.com for
further discussion you can go to our
Facebook page that's
facebook.com AJ insidestory join the
conversation on X as well our handle is
AJ inside story from myself and the
whole team here in delha thanks for
watching and bye-bye for
[Music]
now